===========
NRPE README
===========

:Project page: https://github.com/KristianLyng/nrpe
:Author: Kristian Lyngstøl <kristian@bohemians.org>
:Date: March, 2011

.. contents::

.. sectnum::


New documentation
`````````````````

The following is added documentation for NRPE 3.0. It will change as the
project stabilize and approaches some sort of upstream-like state.

NRPE "3.0"
==========

This is a so far unofficial version of NRPE, dubbed 3.0 by yours truly. It
implements IPv6 support and does a general cleanup. The version-number 3.0
was chosen because it differs vastly from previous versions, but is subject
to change.

It is quite likely that several key features are broken at the moment, thus
any feedback is welcome. This applies particularly to non-standard configs.


About the IPv6 support
======================

NRPE "3.0" uses getaddrinfo() both for listening and connecting, which
makes it agnostic to IPv4 vs IPv6. However, it does present a challenge
with dual-stack: I have yet to implement support for listening to both IPv4
and IPv6. Connecting is no problem though: getaddrinfo() returns a list of
possible addresses to use and the correct way of using it is to iterate
over it until it connects. This will leave the choice of prioritization to
the operating system, which should return a sorted list.

An other flaw is that I have not verified how connection-filtering works at
the moment. This likely breaks for IPv6, thus you'll need to allow all,
then use firewall techniques. Frankly, this might be the Correct solution
anyway.

Build system
============

I've moved away from the "what the heck is this?"-system and to plain
autotools for "3.0". This should allow easier maintainability and makes
everything less magic. However, this is likely to have broken several key
features. I've only tested it on Debian (though the result has been tested
on other systems), but it shouldn't be that hard to adapt.

The general build process from scratch is::

        ./autogen.sh
        ./configure
        make
        make install # may require root. e.g: sudo make install

If you require a package, you can use::

        ./autogen.sh
        ./configure
        make dist

Which will build a proper tar-ball (which doesn't require you to run
``./autogen.sh``)

Dependencies
------------

To build, you will need:

- Basic build utilities (make, a C compiler/linker, etc)
- automake, autoconf, autoheader (i.e., autotools. This is only required if
  you do not have a tar-ball generated by ``make dist``)
- pkg-config and openssl if using ssl, or pass --without-ssl to
  ``./configure``

There are no dependencies to run the nrpe-server or use check_nrpe except
OpenSSL if you are using SSL.




Pre NRPE "3.0"-documentation
````````````````````````````


The following is the (reformatted) documentation that shipped with NRPE
2.*. It may not apply verbatim to the current version, but is left for
completeness.

It was written by Ethan Galstad (nagios@nagios.org).


Further documentation
=====================

For installation instructions and information on the design overview
of the NRPE addon, please read the PDF documentation that is found in
this directory: NRPE.pdf

Purpose
=======
The purpose of this addon is to allow you to execute Nagios
plugins on a remote host in as transparent a manner as possible.


Contents
========

There are two pieces to this addon:

1. NRPE
       - This program runs as a background process on the
         remote host and processes command execution requests
         from the check_nrpe plugin on the Nagios host.
         Upon receiving a plugin request from an authorized
         host, it will execute the command line associated
         with the command name it received and send the
         program output and return code back to the
         check_nrpe plugin

2. check_nrpe
         - This is a plugin that is run on the Nagios host
           and is used to contact the NRPE process on remote
           hosts.  The plugin requests that a plugin be
           executed on the remote host and wait for the NRPE
           process to execute the plugin and return the result.
           The plugin then uses the output and return code
           from the plugin execution on the remote host for
           its own output and return code.


Installing
==========

The check_nrpe plugin should be placed on the Nagios host along
with your other plugins.  In most cases, this will be in the
/usr/local/nagios/libexec directory.

The nrpe program and the configuration file (nrpe.cfg) should
be placed somewhere on the remote host.  Note that you will also
have to install some plugins on the remote host if you want to
make much use of this addon.



Configuring
===========

Sample config files for the NRPE daemon are located in the
sample-config/ subdirectory.


Running Under INETD or XINETD
=============================

If you plan on running nrpe under inetd or xinetd and making use
of TCP wrappers, you need to do the following things:


Update /etc/services
--------------------

Add a line to your /etc/services file as follows (modify the port
number as you see fit)::

	nrpe            5666/tcp	# NRPE

Add NRPE to inetd or xinetd configuration
-----------------------------------------

Add entries for the NRPE daemon to either your inetd or xinetd
configuration files.  Which one your use will depend on which
superserver is installed on your system.  Both methods are described
below.  NOTE: If you run nrpe under inetd or xinetd, the server_port
and allowed_hosts variables in the nrpe configuration file are
ignored.


INETD
.....

If your system uses the inetd superserver WITH tcpwrappers, add an
entry to /etc/inetd.conf as follows::

        nrpe 	stream 	tcp 	nowait 	<user> /usr/sbin/tcpd <nrpebin> -c <nrpecfg> --inetd

If your system uses the inetd superserver WITHOUT tcpwrappers, add an
entry to /etc/inetd.conf as follows::

	nrpe 	stream 	tcp 	nowait 	<user> <nrpebin> -c <nrpecfg> --inetd


- Replace <user> with the name of the user that the nrpe server should run as.
  Example: `nagios`
- Replace <nrpebin> with the path to the nrpe binary on your system.
  Example: `/usr/local/nagios/nrpe`
- Replace <nrpecfg> with the path to the nrpe config file on your system.
  Example: `/usr/local/nagios/nrpe.cfg`


XINETD
......

If your system uses xinetd instead of inetd, you'll probably
want to create a file called 'nrpe' in your /etc/xinetd.d
directory that contains the following entries::


	# default: on
	# description: NRPE
	service nrpe
	{
        	flags           = REUSE
	        socket_type     = stream
        	wait            = no
	        user            = <user>
        	server          = <nrpebin>
	        server_args     = -c <nrpecfg> --inetd
        	log_on_failure  += USERID
	        disable         = no
		only_from       = <ipaddress1> <ipaddress2> ...
	}


- Replace <user> with the name of the user that the nrpe server should run as.
- Replace <nrpebin> with the path to the nrpe binary on your system.
- Replace <nrpecfg> with the path to the nrpe config file on your system.
- Replace the <ipaddress> fields with the IP addresses of hosts which
  are allowed to connect to the NRPE daemon.  This only works if xinetd was
  compiled with support for tcpwrappers.

Restart inetd or xinetd
-----------------------

Restart inetd or xinetd will the following command (pick the
on that is appropriate for your system::

	/etc/rc.d/init.d/inet restart

	/etc/rc.d/init.d/xinetd restart

OpenBSD users can use the following command to restart inetd::

	kill -HUP `cat /var/run/inet.pid`

Update tcp-wrapper entries
--------------------------

Add entries to your /etc/hosts.allow and /etc/hosts.deny
file to enable TCP wrapper protection for the nrpe service.
This is optional, although highly recommended.

Configuring Things On The Nagios Host
=======================================

Examples for configuring the nrpe daemon are found in the sample
nrpe.cfg file included in this distribution.  That config file
resides on the remote host(s) along with the nrpe daemon.  The
check_nrpe plugin gets installed on the Nagios host.  In order
to use the check_nrpe plugin from within Nagios, you'll have
to define a few things in the host config file.  An example
command definition for the check_nrpe plugin would look like this::

        define command {
	        command_name	check_nrpe
	        command_line	/usr/local/nagios/libexec/check_nrpe -H $HOSTADDRESS$ -c $ARG1$
	}

In any service definitions that use the nrpe plugin/daemon to
get their results, you would set the service check command portion
of the definition to something like this (sample service definition
is simplified for this example)::

        define service{
                host_name		someremotehost
                service_description	someremoteservice
                check_command		check_nrpe!yourcommand
                ... etc ...
        }

where "yourcommand" is a name of a command that you define in
your nrpe.cfg file on the remote host (see the docs in the
sample nrpe.cfg file for more information).


Questions?
----------

If you have questions about this addon, or problems getting things
working, first try searching the nagios-users mailing list archives.
Details on searching the list archives can be found at
http://www.nagios.org

If all else fails, you can email me and I'll try and respond as
soon as I get a chance.

	-- Ethan Galstad (nagios@nagios.org)
